[FEATURE] Add basic TypoScript examples (#422)
TYPO3-Documentation/TYPO3CMS-Tutorial-GettingStarted: Documentation/TypoScript/Index.rst

:navigation-title: TypoScript introduction
..  include:: /Includes.rst.txt

..  _typoscript:

=========================================
A minimal page created by pure TypoScript
=========================================

> TypoScript is the basic configuration script used to configure the frontend

Reviewer: Here too.

Author: done

> TypoScript is the basic configuration script used to configure the frontend

Author: ```suggestion
TypoScript is the basic configuration language used to configure the frontend
```

output of a page in TYPO3.

You can find detailed information about
:ref:`TypoScript <t3coreapi:typoscript-syntax-syntax>` and its syntax in

> the reference "TYPO3 explained".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the reference "TYPO3 Explained".
```

The semantics of TypoScript settings are listed in the
:ref:`TypoScript Reference <t3tsref:start>`.

..  _typoscript-hello-world:

"Hello world" example in TypoScript
===================================

..  versionchanged:: 13.1
    The site set can be used as
    :ref:`TypoScript provider <t3coreapi:site-sets-typoscript>`. It is not

>     necessary to use a TypoScript record as is explained in tutorials for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    necessary to use a TypoScript record as it is explained in tutorials for
```

Author: Both are grammatically correct, but the first one ("as is explained") is more concise and common in formal writing. I will keep mine, ok?

>     necessary to use a TypoScript record as is explained in tutorials for

Reviewer: "as is explained" sounds strange - maybe "as explained"?

Author: done

>     TYPO3 versions 12,4 and below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    TYPO3 versions 12.4 and below.
```

Put the following TypoScript in a file called :file:`setup.typoscript` within
your :ref:`Site set <t3coreapi:site-sets>`. The site set is the folder
containing your :ref:`site configuration <site-configuration>`.

..  literalinclude:: _minimal.typoscript
    :caption: config/sites/main/setup.typoscript
    :linenos:

#.  Is a comment. See the Syntax of comments in TypoScript:
    :ref:`Comments <t3coreapi:typoscript-syntax-syntax-comment-blocks>`.
#.  Assigns a top level object of type :ref:`PAGE <t3tsref:object-type-page>`
    to a variable called `page`.
#.  The `page` gets more options in this block. See the
    :ref:`Blocks in the TypoScript syntax <t3coreapi:typoscript-syntax-syntax-curly-brackets>`.
#.  Another comment.
#.  Assigns a content object (also called "cObject") of type
    :ref:`TEXT <t3tsref:cobj-text>` to
    :confval:`index number 10 <t3tsref:page-array>` of `page`. It has the path
    `page.10` if you want to change it later.
#.  Assigns the value `Hello, world.` to the `value` property of the TEXT
    cObject stored in path `page.10`.

> Clear all caches via the following console command or the button in the backend:

Reviewer: As this is the Getting Started tutorial: "or the button in the backend" - which of the many buttons?

Author: I added a todo as that page is still missing

..  code-block:: bash

    ddev typo3 cache:flush

You can now preview the result.

..  todo: Add link on how to preview a page.
..  todo: Link to how to clear all caches

..  _typoscript-hello-world-result:

Resulting web page
==================

Here is the resulting web page HTML source for both the TypoScript-only and

> the Fluid based implementations. Notice how TYPO3 has added default markup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Fluid-based implementations. Notice how TYPO3 has added default markup
```

You can find the variable `page` that you just defined. The other variables have
been created by TypoScript loaded globally by the TYPO3 Core and system
extensions. They are some of the
:ref:`Reserved top-level objects <t3tsref:top-level-objects-other-reserved-tlo-s>`.

..  _typoscript-play-around:

Play around with TypoScript
===========================

You can now try out a couple of TypoScript commands to familiarize yourself
with TypoScript.

Here are some examples:

..  _typoscript-example-stdwrap:

Wrap "Hello, world." in p-tags
------------------------------

..  literalinclude:: _stdwrap.typoscript
    :caption: config/sites/main/setup.typoscript
    :linenos:
    :emphasize-lines: 4-7

4.  As we now have several options for :ref:`TEXT <t3tsref:cobj-text>` object
    with path `page.10`, we switch to the
    :ref:`block syntax <t3coreapi:typoscript-syntax-syntax-curly-brackets>` here.
5.  Assign the text to the :confval:`value <t3tsref:text-value>` property of
    the TEXT object.
6.  We use the :confval:`stdWrap <t3tsref:text-stdwrap>` property of the TEXT
    object to configure the :ref:`stdWrap <t3tsref:stdwrap>` function.

>     In this function we use option wrap :confval:`wrap <t3tsref:stdwrap-wrap>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    In this function we use the option wrap :confval:`wrap <t3tsref:stdwrap-wrap>`.
```

    It surrounds the current content of the TEXT object as set in line 5 with

>     the value defined here. The pipe `|` character is replaced with the text.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    the value defined here. The pipe `|` character is replaced with the text stored against the value property.
```

Author: "Stored against" sounds strange. Stored in?

Author: I would opt for "The pipe `|` character is replaced by the text that corresponds to the value property." see my suggestion

>     the value defined here. The pipe `|` character is replaced with the text.

Author: ```suggestion
    the value defined here. The pipe `|` character is replaced by the text that corresponds to the value property.
```

..  note::
    You may sometimes see that :confval:`stdWrap <t3tsref:text-stdwrap>`
    functionality is directly applied to a TEXT object like this:

    ..  literalinclude:: _stdwrap_direct.typoscript
        :caption: config/sites/main/setup.typoscript
        :linenos:
        :emphasize-lines: 6

    For backward compatibility reasons it is possible to apply stdWrap
    properties directly to TEXT object. This is only true for TEXT objects, not
    any other TypoScript cObject types. So we recommend to always use
    stdWrap to stay consistent.

..  _typoscript-example-page-title:

Display the title of the current page on top
--------------------------------------------

..  literalinclude:: _page-title.typoscript
    :caption: config/sites/main/setup.typoscript
    :linenos:
    :emphasize-lines: 3-7

3.  We assign a second content object (also called "cObject") of type
    :ref:`TEXT <t3tsref:cobj-text>` to
    :confval:`index number 5 <t3tsref:page-array>` of `page`. As the index is

>     smaller then the index 10 of the TEXT object containing the text

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    smaller than the index 10 of the TEXT object containing the text
```

>     "Hello World" it is displayed before the other object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    "Hello World", it is displayed before the other object.
```

> 4.  Use the :ref:`block syntax <t3coreapi:typoscript-syntax-syntax-curly-brackets>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4.  Uses the :ref:`block syntax <t3coreapi:typoscript-syntax-syntax-curly-brackets>`
```

Author: This is an interogation, "you should use" so I would keep my version

    to apply properties to the TEXT object.

> 5.  Use the stdWrap property :confval:`field <t3tsref:stdwrap-field>` to fetch

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5.  Uses the stdWrap property :confval:`field <t3tsref:stdwrap-field>` to fetch
```

    the field `title` from the :ref:`database record <t3coreapi:database-records>`
    of the current page.

> 6.  Use the stdWrap property :confval:`wrap <t3tsref:stdwrap-wrap>` to wrap the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6.  Uses the stdWrap property :confval:`wrap <t3tsref:stdwrap-wrap>` to wrap the
```

    current string fetched in line 5 in :html:`<h1>` tags.

..  note::

>     The order in which the content objects are defined in the TypoScript file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The order, in which the content objects are defined in the TypoScript file
```

Author: Chat GBT: No commas are necessary in this sentence. It is correctly written as:

"The order in which the content objects are defined in the TypoScript file."
The sentence flows naturally without any pauses that would require commas.

>     do not matter. They are output from the smallest index to the largest.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    does not matter. They will be output from the smallest index to the largest.
```

Author: Use "does" because the subject "order" is singular.
Both "are output" and "are ejected" can work, but "are output" is more commonly used in this context, especially when referring to displaying or rendering data. "Ejected" is less common and might imply a different context (like removal).

So I only commited do -> does
